This entire project has been developed using an Arduino Uno Microcontroller board and 4 sensors,
namely an accelerometer-ADXL335, an impact sensor (YL 99), a GSM Module (SIM 800A), and a
GPS Sensor (GY 61). All the sensors are attached to the Arduino Board using jumper cables and a
breadboard. We also use an LED light and an active buzzer that are used as an alarm to notify any
nearby entities and the passengers themselves when a crash has happened. The connections are
made similar to the simulation as shown below that we created using the Circuit.io website:
https://www.circuito.io/app?components=269,11021,11856,117693,316349,975601

How the entire project works is very simple, after the initial setup of all sensors
and default values, the sensors constantly check for collisions and whether the car is flipped or not
using the collision switch data and the roll and the pitch from the accelerometer. If the Impact
Sensor gives a LOW value, it means that the key has been pressed and the system knows that a
collision has happened. Once the Arduino gets to know that a collision has happened it sends out a
consequent output and continues to read the data from the accelerometer, namely the roll and pitch
of the vehicle. If these values pass the set threshold values a consequent output that the car has been
flipped is also sent out.
Following that Arduino obtains the geolocation of the crash/vehicle from the
GPS module, and passes all the relevant information like the Driver details, Vehicle Details, and the
Geolocation to the GSM Module that broadcasts it to all nearby entities and the next-of-kin contact
number fed into the system. Once the message is sent out the LED and BUzzer are activated to
notify all nearby entities and the passengers and to make it easier for help to locate the vehicle in
some situations.
In a case where the Impact Sensor gives a false value, the Arduino Board still
checks on the values obtained from the accelerometer, and if those values show that the car has
flipped but there was no collision trigger the same procedure of getting the Geolocation and sending
out the relevant information along with the physical identifies turning on is followed.
